Miles Frank
Ruby
March 28, 2018
42-43 Hours
Toledo

Introduction
The city of Toledo is nestled directly in the middle of Spain, where it is enclosed on three sides by the Tagus river. Its central position has made it integral to much of Spain’s history. This started when it became the Visigothic capital in the 5th century, after that the Muslims took over, and finally in the 11th century the Spaniards claimed control of the city. After the Spaniards took over, they kept stable rule and much of the traditions of Toledo the same since the 11th century.
One theme that continues throughout the rich history of Toledo is people coming together to work on and complete great tasks. From building an epic cathedral and spreading knowledge throughout the world, to starting a war across the nation, people had to come together and work together to complete these endeavors. Even across different rulers, different religions, and different beliefs these people were able to come together and accomplish incredible things.
Another theme, the relationships between different religions and cultures has played an important part in many events. These cultures were mainly the Muslim, Jewish, and Catholic peoples. From the 11th to 16th centuries, the relationships of the different cultures in Toledo have shifted back and forth, from acceptance, to dislike, to outright war. This shifting has caused breakthroughs in science, developments of new styles of architecture, and the emergence of one of the most brutal times in Spain’s history. Religion has affected almost every facet of the history of Toledo, and everywhere you look you will see evidence of how the different religions have sparked innovation and action. 
While the religions and cultures were shifting, so were the beliefs of the people living in the city. These beliefs and how they were made visible show the underlying complexities of Toledo and how they relate to science, technology, art, religion, politics, architecture, and philosophy. These seven topics give an in depth view of the history of Toledo during the 11th to 16th centuries.

Politics
Throughout the 11th to 16th centuries loyalty and backstabbing were major themes in the politics of Toledo. Two examples of this are the stories of Don Álvaro de Luna and Gonzalo Jiménez de Cisneros. They were both prominent politicians around the 15th and 16th centuries and each are memorialized in Toledo. Luna and his wife’s tomb are in the distinguished gothic cathedral of Toledo and many statues of Cisneros decorate squares in the city.
Don Álvaro de Luna was born as an illegitimate son of a noble family. At a young age, the ambitious Luna won the favor of King Juan II, and eventually became his assistant and right hand man. They formed a close bond and King Juan trusted Luna to essentially rule all of Castilla. This is one example of loyalty. Luna was loyal to King Juan and did everything he could to keep the nation from crumbling past the deteriorating state it was in. In 1446 Luna set up an extremely profitable marriage for King Juan with Isabella of Portugal, a wealthy and powerful noble. Isabella however was set on doing everything in her power to get rid of Luna. By 1453 she arrested Luan and had him publicly executed. A year later King Juan died, some say because of the sorrow he felt after Luna died. These are two examples of betrayal. Luna set up a favorable marriage for Isabella, but she immediately turned around and backstabbed him for power. In doing this she also inadvertently helped kill her husband.
Gonzalo Jiménez de Cisneros, like Luna, did not start out with much. He was born as a poor boy in Madrid. He went into the church, which at the time was heavily connected to politics. He got into the good graces of Pedro González de Mendoza, the governor of Castilla and distinguished member of the church, who sponsored him and helped him rise through the ranks. Cisneros eventually became close with Isabel and Fernando, Los Reyes Católicos, the Christian kings. He was made Isabel’s personal confessor and was incredibly loyal to her and Fernando. The Pope said that Cisneros should be the Archbishop of Toledo, Cisneros declined the honor, but the Pope appointed him anyway. He went on to become Cardinal and leader of the Inquisition, where he said, “The Inquisition is so perfect that there will never be any need for reform and it would be sinful to introduce changes.” After Fernando died Cisneros became the regent of Castilla until Fernando’s successor, Carlos I, arrived. While Carlos made his journey, Cisneros did all he could to prepare the kingdom for his arrival. He took power from the nobles and gave it back to the king; he stopped Carlos’ tutor, Adrian of Utrecht, from persuading Carlos to make Spain a part of Austria; and he stopped Juana la Loca, the rightful heir, from usurping the kingdom because she was incompetent. When all these were complete and Cisneros thought the kingdom was ready to be inherited, he journeyed to meet Carlos as he was arriving into the country. Unknown to him, Carlos had written a letter ahead telling Cisneros that he had been released from all offices on charges of assumption of power. Shortly after reading this letter Cisneros died, before meeting Carlos. Cisneros had been loyal all his life to Fernando, and later to Carlos, but Carlos ruthlessly backstabbed him.
These two stories are examples of larger trends going on in the politics of Toledo during this time period. While these political techniques to attain power were commonly used during this time, now it is much harder both for politicians to be loyal and to backstab as extremely. Currently in politics, politicians move from belief to belief and are never loyal to any one. It is also hard to backstab this extremely in today's politics. Nowadays the president’s spouse could not have the president’s advisor publicly executed. This past year, though, has had some examples of more extreme backstabbing, notably President Trump firing many of the people he had employed just a year ago.
Science
In 1085, after the Spaniards took over Toledo, many Europeans came in, but the Muslims were still allowed to stay. This allowed the Europeans to learn from the Muslims and to bring the Muslim knowledge back into Europe in the form of translated Muslim books. The Toleden’s belief in globalism and spreading knowledge was made visible through importing knowledge and translating books from other cultures. Some of the translators important to this process were Gerbert d’Aurillac, who would eventually become Pope Sylvester II, Hermannus the Lame, and Constantine of Africa.
Gerbert d’Aurillac, the student of a priest, came to Toledo from France to learn from Muslims and European scholars in the city and to translate scientific books. This displays both globalism and learning from other cultures because while he could have stayed where he was with other peer scholars, he instead chose to come all the way into Toledo just to be with and learn from the Muslim culture that had grown there over time. After his translations, he wrote a book, De Utilitabitus Astrolabia, on what he had learned about the astrolabe, abacus, and other scientific devices. Also in Toledo, Gerbert invented the celestial sphere, a device that is still used by astronomers today to place objects in the sky in relation to earth. Later in his life, Gerbert went back to the church and became the Pope, where he spread the knowledge that he had gained. Gerbert shows the Toledan ideal of outside knowledge because he was both a foreigner and a scholar who came to Toledo to learn and, after he left to become Pope, spread his knowledge throughout Europe. 
Hermannus the Lame was a monk from Germany who came to Toledo from Germany to study mathematics and science. While he was in Toledo, he wrote with many of the other scholars there about astronomy and mathematics. One mathematical subject he made great contributions to was Rithmomachy, a mathematical game of strategy also called the battle of numeric harmonies. Hermannus and other monks developed a rule set that was used widely throughout European monasteries to teach mathematics. This displays Hermannus’ belief of spreading knowledge and helping people learn because Rithmomachy and Hermannus’ contributions to it taught generations of new European mathematicians. He also translated and wrote about the abacus and how it worked to compute complex division and multiplication. His works on astronomy included De Mensure Astrolabi and De Utilitabitus Astrolabia, which he wrote together with Gerbert.
Constantine of Africa, a doctor bringing knowledge from Africa and the Middle East, came to Toledo with medical books from Africa. Constantine started as a Muslim merchant from Carthage and traveled to Italy. There he learned that there were few books on medicine in Italy and other places in Europe. Upon hearing this, he went back to Africa to gather books on medicine and spread the knowledge to Europe. He brought his books to Toledo where he stayed and translated the books for the rest of his life. Constantine’s initiative to spread knowledge into Europe demonstrates his belief in globalism. He went from Carthage to Italy, back to Africa, and finally to Toledo where he shared his translations of medical books.
Throughout history, globalization has advanced science in many ways. These globalistic translators and scholars in Toledo brought ideas from Africa and the Middle East and up through Europe, possibly setting the spark of the Renaissance, another expansion of European knowledge. Today, a big part of science is collaborating across the world to peer review and learn about new discoveries. In Toledo, it was one of the first times that the wider European community mixed with the Muslim community on a large scale. Therefore, it was one of the first times that massive amounts of knowledge were passed from culture to culture.
Religion
From the 11th to 16th centuries, the religious status of Toledo has fluctuated. In 1085, the convivencia, or mixture of religions living in harmony, created an environmental ideal for the scientific and cultural growth of the period. In the 15th century, however, with the start of the Spanish Inquisition, the convivencia broke and the Muslim and Jewish communities were forced to leave or convert. During the Inquisition a belief in religious purity and homogeneity was made visible through the religious discrimination of the Muslim and Jewish peoples. 
Even before the Inquisition started, there was growing discontent in the Catholic communities of Spain. In 1312, the Spanish church implemented new rules segregating the Catholic communities from the Jewish. Some of these rules included: Jewish people and Christians could not eat together, Christians could not have Jewish wet nurses, Christians and Jews could not have sexual relationships with each other, and there was even a proposal that Jewish people had to wear a symbol proclaiming them to be Jewish. These rules show the church's belief in homogeneity because, though they did not get rid of the Jewish people, they separated them to try and create a homogeneous Christian society. 
Even though Toledo had a history of convivencia, it was one of the earlier cities to become part of the Inquisition, partially because of its political ties to Isabel and Fernando, the monarchs and founders of the Inquisition. They also served as a frontier city against the Muslim caliphate for much of the Inquisition because of its defensible, central position. Toledo served as a main city for the Inquisition. One of the main results of the Inquisition was the religious purification of Spain and Toledo played a big part in this purification.
During this period of time, Toledo was home to some of the harshest conversions for Jewish people. One of the most famous converters was Saint Vincent Ferrer. He is know for brutally converting over thirty five thousand Jewish people to Catholicism. These atrocious acts show his belief in purity because he tried to convert all the people outside his religion to create a “pure” society. Saint Vincent also managed to instill this belief into the people he converted. This meant that the people he converted became some of the harsher converters and also showed Saint Vincent’s belief of purity.
All three of these examples are interesting examples of the religious purity and homogeneity in Spain during this time period and even up until today. However, in other areas of Spanish culture this same type of purity and homogeneity, where everything is the same or similar, is not as prevalent. There are buildings, still standing, that are relics of the Muslim and even older Visigothic cultures; beliefs from old Muslim philosophers that stand true today; and technologies from other cultures that are still very much prevalent. 
Philosophy
Around 1085, the other cultures of Toledo influenced and inspired the intellectual community in the city. This influence is displayed by two of the most prominent philosophers in Toledo at the time: Abu al-Walid Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Rushd, and Gerard of Cremona. These philosophers and their ideals have influenced and inspired many generations of scientists, philosophers, and mathematicians. 
Abu al-Walid Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Rushd also known by his Westernized name, Averroes, is widely known as one of the most influential Muslim philosophers ever. Since he was one of the first Muslim philosophers, he forged the way for and inspired many up and coming philosophers in the area to engage more deeply with thoughts and philosophical issues. Before him, Muslim philosophy was generally prohibited because it was not associated with the Quran. He broke these prejudices by showing that philosophy was a path to find religious truths. This alone reveals that he was inspiring to the young Muslim philosophers because he was almost the creator of the whole field. 
Gerard of Cremona, like many scientists of the time, was mainly a translator. He is known for bridging the gap between the Muslim world and the Christians. His translations are known to have influenced many well regarded scholars: Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas and Copernicus. The reason Gerard came to Toledo was specifically to translate Ptolemy's Almagest, one of the most famous books on astronomy. The complexities of his translations, especially the Almagest, have made him one of the greatest translators of the time. These translations made science, philosophy, and math more accessible for all of Europe. Aspiring scholars no longer needed to invest the time and money into learning the original languages of these books. Because of these translations, many more people could have access to these texts and could become scholars.
These philosophers, though they may not be known today, are pillars of the field and have made philosophy a more sophisticated topic. Many great philosophers today are regarded as the most intellectual of their time. This was similar for the philosophers described here, they expanded the knowledge of many people at the time, from Europe to the Middle East.
Technology
Toledo, throughout its long history, has served as an important location in many wars including the Spanish Inquisition. Part of the reason is the easily defensible terrain surrounding Toledo. The city is enclosed on three sides by the Tagus River, and over the years a strong, solid wall has been built up to protect the city. One major way that Toledo has been a part of these wars is by manufacturing the swords used in them. Later, this technique of sword making spread all over Spain. The sword’s specialty comes from the steel that was used to make them, the formula of which was created while Romans still occupied the city. Throughout the history of Toledo, its association with war is made apparent through the swords and steel that they produced.

This sword is a recreation of Colada, the sword of El Cid, a legendary Spanish warrior. It is made with Toledan steel in the traditional style. This sword and the story of El Cid shows the prevalence of war in Toledo at this time because they display a romanticized version of war and entice young people to get involved in war. 

This sword, while similar to El Cid’s sword, is far less fancy and embellished. This sword is more similar to the ones that would have been mass produced by blacksmiths in Toledo to be used for real war. These swords display the belief of war because they utilize the steel and sword making style of Toledo and were used by the Spanish during the Inquisition. 
Through this one piece of innovative technology Toledo’s relation with war is displayed in two ways: The romantic legend of El Cid, and the brutal mass produced killing implements. In many wars it is not about which side has more skilled fighters. Instead, it is often about which side has more technologically advanced tools, and it is certain that these Toledan swords turned the tide of battles. Even today, America, the nation with the world’s most powerful military, invests huge sums of money into the development of its weapons, whether it be drones or new intercontinental missiles.
Art
A belief in the connection between art and religion is made visible by the contributions to churches in Toledo by El Greco. Domenikos Theotokopoulos, who came to be known as El Greco, “The Greek” in Spanish, came from Crete, a small Mediterranean island. Throughout his life he made exquisite paintings, most of which are in churches or have some religious connotations. 
Not much is known about his early life, though he was likely from a middle to upper class family because of his ability to read and write. Early in his painting career he moved from Crete to Rome, a very religious city, where he established himself as a painter, but never a great one. Because he couldn’t find success there, he soon moved to Spain. While he was in Rome, he had become an acquaintance to a priest who was starting a church in Toledo. This priest hired El Greco to do the paintings for his new church. This was El Greco’s first large commission. After this first big project, he went on to have a successful career painting for churches throughout Toledo. Now if you go into a church in Toledo it is likely that, up on the wall, there will be a painting by El Greco. Later in his life, he became an architect and with his son as an assistant, designed buildings in Toledo.
Possibly the most famous work by El Greco is The Burial of the Count of Orgaz. This painting is a depiction of a legend where Saint Augustine and Saint Stephen came down from heaven to attend the burial and welcome Don Gonzalez Ruiz to heaven. Gonzalez Ruiz was a generous and pious member of the upper class of Toledo who was known as the Count of Orgaz. This clearly demonstrates the relationship between art and religion because it is an exquisitely painted illustration of a heavily religious scene.
Another famous painting by El Greco was Opening of the Fifth Seal (The Vision of Saint John) in the church of Saint John the Baptist. It is a slightly surreal version of a scene from the Book of Revelations in the New Testament where the fifth seal is being opened and martyrs are crying out to God for deliverance. This shows how art and religion are interconnected because it is not only a version of a religious scene but El Greco has put his own surrealist lens on it to make it a true piece of art. Much of this relationship comes from the artist being able to make their own decisions in their depictions of these scenes. Without this it would not be art, but just a visualization of a story.
The story of El Greco and his famous paintings show that art is a part of religion and that religion can inspire art. Religion without art is just words on a page, but with art religious stories come alive, and with contributions from artists as great and well renown as El Greco they can take on whole new meanings. The input from artists putting their own lenses on religion, and the religious stories inspiring these artists intertwines the two and makes them both stronger and more impactful.
Architecture
The Gothic cathedral in Toledo is one of the most famous landmarks in the entire city. Construction started in 1227 and some of the most skilled craftsmen were hired to decorate the inside of the cathedral. In this cathedral a belief in honoring the sacred is made visible by the grandeur of its decorations. Some of the most impressive are the Capilla de Santiago, the main altar, and the Transparente.

One of the main attractions of the Gothic Cathedral in Toledo is the Transparente. It is a meticulously carved version of many prominent religious figures. Around the Transparente are also paintings of many of these figures done by some of the best artists at the time. This whole section of the cathedral honors the sacred religion of Toledo, Christianity, because of the time that the sculpture spent getting every detail to be just right.

The Capilla de Santiago is a memorial to one of the most prominent politicians of the time, Alvaro de Luna, and his wife. These elaborately carved tombs and paintings of religious figures show the honor that was bestowed upon Luna for being such a superb politician. It is also surprising how his tomb was placed here after he was arrested and publicly executed by the queen in 1453, ten years before construction finished on the cathedral. It just goes to show how much they wanted to memorialize him. In the background of this picture is a painting of Santiago Matamoros (The Moor Slayer). He was a legendary warrior who fought against the Moors. His sacred story is honored here with a prestigious position in the Cathedral. 

The main altar of the Cathedral of Toledo is a huge mountain of gold imbued with scenes and characters from the Bible. As the main piece of the cathedral, it is also one of the most well made. From the ground, where worshippers sit, you can still see, in great detail, Jesus Christ all the way at the ceiling of the Cathedral. The craftsmanship in this piece of art shows the dedication of the Toledan people to their sacred religion.
These sections of the Gothic Cathedral of Toledo show how much the people of Toledo care that the things they hold dear to them are honored and memorialized. In this one cathedral not only is their religion honored but their greatest politicians are memorialized and their greatest artists display their work. The dedication of these people and the beautiful art displayed here are what make the Gothic Cathedral of Toledo one of a kind and unique to the city.
Conclusion
Throughout Toledo’s history it has gone from primarily Christian, to Muslim, to a convivencia, back to primarily Christian. These changes have sparked some of the most important events and discoveries in Toledo. They caused the period of knowledge, where scholars of every race came together to share wisdom, they caused the invention of some of the strongest steel swords, and they caused the Spanish Inquisition, a brutal war of purity and religion. To complete these challenging tasks, the people of Toledo came together, shared beliefs, and made them possible. 
Through these events, the beliefs of the people in Toledo can be made visible. The belief of importing and sharing knowledge, the belief in war, the belief in purity, and the beliefs in loyalty, backstabbing, and honoring the sacred. While the beliefs in Toledo have shifted over time, all of these beliefs were, at one point, held true by the citizens of Toledo.
Today, many of these beliefs hold true and are important for cities and even nations to recognise. Globalism and the sharing of knowledge is critical for modern societies to succeed, and in many ways Toledo was one of the first to fully embrace the idea of multiculturalism and learning from other peoples. Still today, people need to honor what they consider sacred and people continue to be inspired by their heros, old and new. 
Bibliography 
Calvert, Albert Frederick. Toledo, an Historical and Descriptive Account of the “City of Generations;.” Place of publication not identified, Nabu Press, 2010.
Chueca Goitia, Fernando. Madrid & Toledo. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1972.
De Weever, Jacqueline. Chaucer Name Dictionary: A Guide to Astrological, Biblical, Historical, Literary and Mythological Names in the Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. Neuausg. ed., New York, Garland, 1996. Google Books, Garland Publishing, books.google.com/books?id=hdxQAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA155&lpg=PA155&dq=CHAUCER+NAME+DICTIONARY+GERARD+OF+CREMONA&source=bl&ots=ykQs54ySQV&sig=djV6I92O9xdJlIDBfwddEfiTIIA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiuiILb5-7ZAhUU52MKHcIND0oQ6AEILTAB#v=onepage&q=CHAUCER%20NAME%20DICTIONARY%20GERARD%20OF%20CREMONA&f=false. Accessed 15 Mar. 2018.
Dunlap, Isaac Hunter. “Gerard of Cremona.” Gerard of Cremona, Western Illinois U, 1995, www.wiu.edu/users/mfihd/research/gerard/gerard.html. Accessed 15 Mar. 2018.
“El Greco in Toledo.” Connaissance des Arts.
Fierro, Maribel. Abd Al-Rahman III: The First Cordoban Caliph. New York, Oneworld Publications, 2012.
Fitzpatrick, Richard. “A Modern Almagest: An updated version of Ptolemy’s Almagest.” A Modern Almagest: An updated version of Ptolemy’s Almagest, U of Texas, 16 Apr. 2013, farside.ph.utexas.edu/Books/Syntaxis/Syntaxis.html. Accessed 15 Mar. 2018.
Fletcher, Richard. Moorish Spain. 2nd ed., Berkeley, U of  California  P, 2006.
Freely, John. Aladdin’s Lamp: How Greek Science Came to Europe through the Islamic World. New York (N.Y.), Vintage Books, 2010.
Garrett, Jan, Dr. “General Notes on Averroes (Ibn Rushd).” Notes on Averroes, Western Kentucky U, 4 Dec. 2007, people.wku.edu/jan.garrett/302/ibnrushd.htm. Accessed 15 Mar. 2018.
Gerber, Jane S. The Jews of Spain: A History of the Sephardic Experience. New York, Free Press, 1994.
Greco,, and Jonathan Brown. El Greco of Toledo. Boston, Little, Brown, 1982.
Greco,, and Fernando Marías. El Greco of Toledo: Painter of the Visible and the Invisible. Toledo, Fundación El Greco, 2014.
Hillier, H. Chad. “Ibn Rushd.” Ibn Rushd, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, www.iep.utm.edu/ibnrushd/. Accessed 15 Mar. 2018.
 History of Swords from Toledo. U of Illinois, dtrinkle.matse.illinois.edu/MatSE584/articles/steel_collector/swords_from_Toledo.html. Accessed 24 Mar. 2018.
Kamen, Henry. The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision. New Haven, Yale UP, 1999.
McNeill-Moss, Geoffrey. The Siege of Alcazar. New York, A. A. Knopf, 1937.
Menocal, Maria Rosa. The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews, and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain. New York, Back Bay Books, 2012.
Michener, James A. Iberia: Spanish Travels and Reflections. New York, Fawcett Crest, 1989.
Pe?rez, Joseph. The Spanish Inquisition: A History. New Haven, Yale UP, 2005.
Prache, Anne. Cathedrals of Europe. Ithaca, Cornell Univ. Press, 2000.
Said, Issam El-, et al. Islamic Art and Architecture: The System of Geometric Design. Reprint. ed., Reading, Garnet Publishing, 2001.
Steves, Rick, and Rick Steves. Madrid & Toledo. Berkeley, Avalon Travel, 2015.
Wethey, Harold E. El Greco & His School. Princeton, N.J, Princeton UP, 1962.
Woog, Adam. Life during the Spanish Inquisition. San Diego, ReferencePoint Press, 2015.

