Outside the World of Creativity
Throughout Never Let Me Go creativity is one of the most important factors in the students lives. Since they were born their lives have centered around their classes in art, and their displays of creativity within them. However creativity is more important than just in their classes, throughout the book the meaning of creativity changes from defining their social order, to determining the fate of deferrals, to their value for the outside world. In Never Let Me Go, Ishiguro creates a society within Hailsham where someone’s value is determined by their creativity, in order to foreshadow how they are judged on a larger cultural level. 
In their early years at Hailsham the abuse of Tommy on account of his creativity symbolizes how the students are perceived by the outside world. When Tommy is first introduced, he is throwing a tantrum on the soccer field while onlookers “[swapped] reasons why Tommy deserved everything he got” but inside they “were starting to feel guilty” and want him to be taken away (Ishiguro 10). Since at this point in the novel we don’t know that they are clones, this scene just seems like normal middle school bullying, but looking back it takes on a deeper meaning. Ishiguro’s use of “deserved” shows that the onlookers believe that Tommy is causing this to himself and that his lack of creativity inherently means that needs to be punished. Interestingly, they are not just talking about the guardians punishing him for bad work, but instead “everything he got,” both in his social life and in classes. This dualism is the same as how, in the outside world, clones are both subject to social isolation and forced to give up their lives to donate organs. One social punishment and one institutional punishment. Another way this quote mimics the outside world is when the onlookers “were starting to feel guilty.” This feeling of “guilt” is mirrored at the end of the novel when Kathy and Tommy learn that people “tried to convince themselves you weren’t really like us” (Ishiguro 263). They did this so they would not have to feel the guilt that comes with slaughtering, and harvesting the vital organs, of other humans. 
The ignorant fantasy of deferrals, and the theory of how creativity influences the decision, are used to show how the student donors are lesser than normal people. While Tommy’s theory might make sense for the more privileged Hailsham students, it grossly overestimates their political standing the larger world. “It’ll be really hard to judge [if they are in love], and it’s probably impossible to get it right every time. But the point is, whoever decides, Madame or whoever it is, the need something to go on” (Ishiguro 175). The phrasing that Tommy uses here of “judge” and “whoever decides” displays his ignorance of the outside world. “Judge” connects this passage back to Hailsham, when they were judged based on their creativity, this is the same, except now, they are being judged by the outside world, and not each other. This is a large source for ignorance, they know each other, not the outside, so they don’t understand the position they hold in the larger society. As Miss Emily said, “even back when Hailsham was considered a shining beacon, an example of how we might move to a more humane and better way of doing things, even then, it wasn’t true” (Ishiguro 258). Even when Hailsham was at its pinnacle or power, they could not influence society in this meaningful of a way. Additionally, the word “humane,” from the word human, shows how even Miss Emily, who has been one of their most influential benefactors, thinks of them as below human or worse than a normal person. Their overestimation of power as well as their ignorance of their own social position are used to set up the ending where these are both revealed. 
The final reveal that their art was just a political tool for the guardians capstones the overall cultural insignificance of the students and their creativity. One question the novel circles around for most of the book is, why do the Hailsham students do all this art? This is first answered by the Exchanges — an economic system between the students, and a way to determine social rank — but once the students move onto the cottages the Exchanges become irrelevant. The second answer presented is that of the deverals, but even though it seems plausible until the end, it is disregarded as a dream of ignorant kids. The third and final answer is that the art was used as a tool for Miss Emily and Maddame’s movement to gain political standing, and attract supporters. Both of these first two answers give the students agency over their lives. “[The Exchanges] were our only means … of building up a collection of personal items” (Ishiguro 16), and the deferrals let them escape the system of organ donation. However what makes the final answer so powerful is how it shows that, in the end, the students never had any power. While Miss Emily is explaining the reasoning behind Hailsham to Kathy and Tommy, Kathy asks why they needed to prove the students had souls, and Miss Emily answers with a rhetorical question: “As you say, why would anyone doubt you had a soul?” (Ishiguro 260). This one quote ties together the themes of ignorance, creativity, and social power into one message to show the insignificance of the clones. Because it is phrased as a rhetorical question, where Miss Emily knows all the answers but the students don’t, it exemplifies their ignorance, and shows they actually don’t understand the outside world or the other themes no matter how much they think they do. The word “anyone” signifies the difference in social power because Tommy and Kathy are not included in the “anyone” and thus aren’t part of the larger society. These in conjunction with the fact that in the end all Miss Emily’s work was undone by a small scandal makes the students overall insignificant in the outside world. 

