Plato and the Legalists on Cloning
Plato, a renowned Greek philosopher, and the Legalists, a group of politicians and philosophers, both made resounding philosophical impacts. One defining aspect of both Plato and the Legalists’ ideal governments was a focus on being as economically productive as possible. Their philosophy differed on the inherent “goodness” of humans. This cultural distinction created two drastically different societies and governmental styles. Clones in Never Let Me Go presents a very interesting economic opportunity, however they also carry a heavy cultural and societal burden. When comparing how both governments would think about clones with respect to this burden there is no clear distinction between good and bad. 
The Legalists’ philosophy revolved around their belief that “[hardly] ten men of true integrity and good faith can be found today” (Han Feizi). This stance that even their own citizens were inherently bad would extend onto the clones, who were already thought of as less than human. While this may make it sound like the Legalists were an evil government, bent on hurting their people, it is actually quite the opposite. “The best laws are those that are uniform and inflexible, so that the people can understand them” (Han Feizi). Additionally, Lord Shang wrote, “The sage ruler alone possesses [strength], and therefore he is able to transmit humaneness and rightness to all-under-Heaven” (Lord Shang). These Legalist quotes shows that, while they did value strength, they also valued morality and being fair to their people. This is what would separate them from the society in Never Let Me Go, because in Never Let Me Go the clones were “kept in the shadows, an people did their best not to think about [them]” (Ishiguro 263). The Legalists would never pass up an opportunity to use more citizens to their fullest potential even if they were clones and it meant showing them in the public light. This means they would not be afraid to face the societal issues regarding the clones, and would most likely end up creating a fair law system for them as well.
Plato’s ideal government functioned a different way. Instead of creating punishments, Plato sought to eliminate distractions, like wealth and property, and focus on the community. “They will have no private property. They will eat together, and their houses will be open to all” (Plato). This sense of a shared community is opposed to the relationship the clones have with their greater community. In Never Let Me Go, the clones form their own tight community, segregated from the outer world. While Miss Emily, the main benefactor of the movement to improve clones’ conditions, was explaining the reasoning behind Hailsham she says, “And we saw to it too, after you left us, you were kept away from the worst of those horrors” (Ishiguro 261). This trend of separation runs throughout the entire book, from the seclusion of Hailsham, to seclusion in the cottages, the clones are consistently kept together, away from the general community. It also shows up in ancient Greece with the concept of citizenship, which most likely would never be granted to a clone. While Plato believed in sharing within the community he also drew a sharp distinction between citizen and foreigner (Plato). However Plato also focused on having an economical state and a completely segregated class would be less productive. For these reason, he would have kept the clones within from his community, but as slaves—which were common at the time—so they would still be productive workers. So, unlike in Never Let Me Go, they would be a part of the community, but similarly discriminated against.
In Never Let Me Go, one question the novel circles around is, why do the Hailsham students do all this art? In a Legalist society this question is irrelevant, and they even go as far as to say the arts are parasitic, “The six parasites are: rites and music, odes and history …” (Lord Shang). The concept of creativity doesn’t matter as much as how powerful your military is, or how much grain you can supply it with, when there are warring nations on your border. While this sounds bad for the clones, it is actually good for them. If there’s no time to debate whether creativity is important or if you have a soul or not, all that is important is your work. The circumstances of the setting drastically change how cultural problems are dealt with, and what problems need to be dealt with. So if there was less time to discuss the cultural side, the economic side—more soldiers and workers—would be their driving factor. This would most likely contrast Plato’s philosophy, which came about with a completely different setting. Around this time in ancient Greece, fourth and fifth centuries b.c.e., the arts and philosophy were an important part of society (Mattern-Parkes 74), even more so than the time period of Never Let Me Go, post World War II Britain. And so an excellence in creativity would do more to show that a clone is still a person, even if they are not eligible for citizenship. Throughout Never Let Me Go, the challenges facing the students change when their setting changes, and if the setting were in the Warring States Period of China or ancient Greece, there is no doubt that their cultural challenges would adapt as well. 
From a first glance it would seem as though the Legalists would treat clones worse because of their harsh laws, and Plato would treat them better because of his community focus, but there is no sharp distinction. However, today’s government is completely different from both the Legalist autocracy, and Plato’s almost communist oligarchy, however we may be faced with the challenges regarding cloning. With that said, many similar challenges that face clones appear with any influx of foreign workers and looking at the past, their treatment has been similar to or even worse than all three cases: Never Let Me Go, Plato’s philosophy, and the Legalist government. With regards to this track record, if science progresses far enough to enable mass cloning, how will our government respond?
