Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, is a compilation of many short stories, told by pilgrims on their journey to Canterbury. Each story in The Canterbury Tales is personal to the storyteller, and many aspects of their identity can be seen throughout their story. The Knight’s tale contains strong themes of chivalry and extravagance among lords, themes that a knight would likely uphold. On the other hand, the Miller, who would’ve spent most of his life on a farm, tells a much simpler tale, and uses frequently similes of animals to portray his characters. Though he uses these similes for all of his characters, he links the male characters to a variety of animals, while he only links the female character, Alison, to farm animals. By depicting her in such a way, Chaucer illustrates Alison as an object or commodity, demonstrating the male view of women at the time.
	Chaucer frequently uses these similes, beginning with the first time he describes Alison. He details how she would “skip and play, // Like kids or calves” (151-152), and of her “[s]kittish” nature “just like a pretty colt” (155). A “colt” and “calves” are both animals that would be owned by a farmer—likely male due to the time period—and would be used as a good to bargain and barter with. These similes between Alison and the animals clearly illustrate the identity that Chaucer has formed for her: an identity as a commodity for the men in this tale. Prior to these depictions, Chaucer explains how the “[j]ealous” carpenter “kept [Alison] closely caged, // For she was wild and young” (116-117). By describing Alison as “wild” and stating that the carpenter kept her “caged”, demonstrates how the carpenter wishes to domesticate his currently untamed wife. This further emphasizes Chaucer’s belief that women should be analogous to barn animals: a simple, docile piece of property. Sexism and the objectification of women is a common theme throughout The Canterbury Tales, and these similes—even if unintentional—demonstrate the mindset of men during this time.
