The concept of hell has existed for thousands of years and has been illustrated in a multitude of ways. However, Dante’s Inferno was the first text to depict hell as a layered location. Being the first to portray hell in such a manner allowed Dante to personalize the design and include many of his ideas and beliefs. Despite this, Dante couldn’t present his ideas too obviously, as the sense of normality creates the feeling of safety—the opposite mood that hell should inflict. Thus, throughout Inferno, Dante uses increasing amounts of contradiction and juxtaposition to emphasize certain details and justify the design of his hell.
Dante utilizes these contradictions often, starting the canto IV. Dante, the pilgrim, awakens from his deep sleep in the first layer of hell, greeted by Virgil who states “[n]ow we descend into the sightless zone” (Pinsky, IV, 9). As the two continue through Limbo, Dante makes many observations. He sees “a fire that overcame the bleak” (57), “a noble castle” (90), “lofty walls” (92), “a handsome stream” (93), and “a fresh green meadow” (96). Additionally, he states that he went to “a place where [he] could look / From a spacious well-lit height and view them all” (101). The abundance of visual observations and use of verbs like “look” and “view” clearly contradict the sightlessness that Virgil initially mentions, showing that this sightlessness is not literal. Furthermore, Virgil explains that many of the spirits in Limbo did not sin, but hadn’t been baptized. Dante the poet, a strongly devout Christian, would likely believe that without God direction and purpose are lost—qualities often represented by sight. Thus, Dante likely included the wordk sightless to slander the aimless unbaptized souls, and promote the importance of God. This initially strange contradictory statement is explained when looking at Dante the poet’s personal beliefs, leaving the final statement: God gives you purpose. 
In the following canto, Dante merges juxtaposition with the sustained theme of contradiction to justify the architecture of his hell. Shortly after entering the second layer of hell, Lust, Dante the pilgrim observes that he is “where / All light is mute” (Pinsky, V, 27-28). This use of synesthesia creates an unnatural feel, heightened by the contradiction of abundant noises surrounding this observation: “sad crescendo” (25), “noise of lamentation” (26), and “bellowing like the ocean” (28). Additionally, Pinsky juxtaposes the connotations of visual and auditory senses; “light” is much more positive, associated with angels and god, where “lamentation”, “bellowing”, and an explicitly “sad crescendo” are much darker and hellish. By including these noises, the quote “All light is mute” has the opposite meaning—darkness is noisy. With hell representing the darkness, looking closer at the definition of each noise provides the full meaning. Crescendo means to gradually increase, a term usually associated with music, lamentation is to mourn or grieve, and bellowing evokes an image of a monster or perhaps a creature of hell. When these three sounds, initially identified by contradiction and juxtaposition, are put together in sequence, “crescendo”, then “lamentation”, then “bellowing”, it creates a trio that gives the feeling of descent. This is a descent from pleasantry to misery, analogous to Paradise, Purgatory, and Inferno.
Within the same canto, Dante progresses the theme of juxtaposition, allowing him to deepen the meaning of this layer of hell. Dante and Virgil advance through Lust, and see “the hurricane of hell” (Pinsky, V, 30). It “Sweep[s] the ravaged spirits as it rends, / Twists, and torments them” (30-31), causing the spirits to “dip and veer / Foundering in the wind’s rough buffetings” (38-41). Amidst this, birds fly freely. Winter starlings “[f]orm crowded flocks” (38) and cranes “form a line in the air” (42). The word “form”—used to describe both of the birds—demonstrates their control and freedom. This sense of freedom in amplified when contrasted with the spirits which are described by Pinsky as “ravaged” things that “[f]ounder”, while a violent hurricane “[s]weep[s]” and “torments” them. Virgil describes the souls as those having “[t]heir reason mastered by desire” (36). The birds, being the spirits’ counterpart, would have their desire mastered by reason. Thus, the birds exemplify the ideal of the Augustinian moral system: where “reason’s perception guide and anchor desire” (Pinsky, 313-314). This contrast shows how the tormented spirits, punished because of their desire, now desire to be like the birds and fly free, creating an eternal lust.
	Dante uses contradiction and juxtaposition throughout Inferno to justify the architecture of his hell. These literary devices draw attention to details that explain his design—like “sightless” in canto IV, or the birds in canto V. These subtle details with their hidden meanings are perhaps a way for Dante to appeal to the scholars, as he wrote Inferno in the Italian vernacular to allow for laypeople to hear his work. Hidden meanings are common in poetry, providing an interesting second layer for each text, illustrating the power of literature.
