	Power is a big part of any society, and in Homer’s Odyssey, it was no different. The most important kind of power in Tthe Odyssey was status, or honor. This power did not make you physically stronger than someone, but instead increased your power through followers, wealth, and other kinds of social influence. 
Status doesn’t enhance your physical power—as it is a social construct—but people with high status are generally those that are stronger and smarter. This is because status is often gained through feats of strength and bravery. Status can also be gained simply by being assertive and showing character. This assertion is demonstrated by Telemachus on page 116 and 117. Telemachus’ home was swarmed with suitors, who ate his food and drank his wine, and he didn’t do anything to stop them. Eventually, he got the courage—with help from Athena—and order all the suitors to leave and to “dine elsewhere”. The suitors were definitely not happy with this, but this act made them recognize Telemachus’ power and authority. He had gained status in the eyes of the suitors. This also shows that power and status isn’t always a positive thing; You can acknowledge someone’s status and respect them as a powerful figure, but still not like them. Telemachus’ situation also shows how power can be lost, as he started out with none. The suitors likely started out only coming occasionally and eating some of his food, but as they saw he didn’t stop them, they would become more and more intrusive. Each time the suitors took advantage of him, Telemachus losese more power.
	Family is another very important part of power, as you can gain and lose just as much power from your relatives as you can from yourself. This is highlighted on pages 293 to 297, when Odysseus talks with dead Achilles in Hades. One of the first things that Achilles does is ask about how his son, Neoptolemus, is doing. Odysseus describes how he fought fearlessly in Troy, delighting Achilles. This delight of course from a father’s pride in his son, but also because Neoptolemus brought honor for the entire family through his valliant fighting. Achilles will now be more well known, and his descendents with have a better life.
A necessity for status to function as a major power in society is communication. Without communication, no one would ever know your name or hear stories about you. Penelope, Odysseus’ wife, says when speaking to him (though she believes he is just a normal traveller), “the names of those who act with nobleness are brought by travelers across the world” (Homer, 435). This statement shows that there were many travellers whothat circulated through the Greek cities, providing that communication which was mentioned before, who quickly spread the word of any major event that occurs.
Once all of these variables have been accounted for—family, war, strength—you are left with a complex concept that ebbs and flows and can change in the blink of an eye. Despite its intricate and erratic nature, status-based power still secures its spot as one of most important power in many cultures. This is not to say that they are all the same, as status-based power is extremely different in various cultures, and can have a multitude of characteristics in any given one. Nevertheless, these are the key points of status-based power that I gathered about society during the Odyssey.
