Nature to many is calm, peaceful, and gentle. But in Genesis and Ovid’s Metamorphoses, nature has a much different connotation. The gods of Genesis and Metamorphoses use nature to punish humans and demonstrate their power. These punishments often come as transformations into parts of nature, and are used when people disrespect or disregard the gods. The plant or animal left behind remains a symbol of the god’s power.
The gods of Ovid’s Metamorphoses are willing to go to great lengths to make sure they are respected and recognized as powerful figures. Even Venus, the goddess of love, is no exception. She helps Hippomenes win Atalanta as a bride but, he never repays her. Infuriated by this, she turns both Atalanta and Hippomenes into lions:
now their elegant pale necks
are cloaked in tawny manes; curved claws are their fingers;
arms are now forelegs, and all the weight of their bodies
shifts to their torsos; and now their talks sweep the arena;
pierce now, their faces; growls supplant verbal expression;
the forest now is their bedroom (Martin 365 Line 813-820)

Martin’s intricate diction shows the severity of the punishment. He states that “growls supplant verbal expression.”. Hippomenes and Atalanta are both no longer able to speak, an action very important to the Romans—especially in romantic relationships. Martin’s diction of the individual morphing body parts also allows for very vivid imagery, creating a very gruesome scene. Such a scene shows why naturistic transformations would send a message, emphasizing the importance of always respecting the gods and their power. Additionally, the lion will forever be a reminder of this incident. These transformations return in Genesis, when God turns the serpent into a snake.
	God creates the Garden of Eden as a shelter for Adam and Eve, allowing them to eat from all to the garden’s many fruit-bearing trees, with one exception: the tree of knowledge. The two abide by this rule, until the serpent arrives and tricks them into eating from this tree. God finds out that his rule had been broken and does not hesitate to exercise his power through punishments. He punishes the serpent saying, “Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life” (King James Bible, Genesis 3-14). This quote may be seen simply as the origin of snakes, but it also demonstrates God’s way of punishing: having the punishment fit the crime. The serpent is punished for tricking Adam and Eve into eating fruit, and although the serpent itself did not eat the fruit, it now may no longer eat anything but dust and could not reach the fruit as it must go “upon thy belly”. Similar to Venus, God’s punishment is a warning and reminder to always follow his rules. When morphing the serpent, God also completely changes the power hierarchy of the world, saying that the serpent “art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field”. God’s ability to change the power of all others shows that he is on top, and he is the most powerful.
Using the natural world as punishment allowed the gods to clearly broadcast their message and create a symbol of power. The gods did this to show that their will should not be ignored, and they should always be respected. By using nature as a severe punishment, Ovid and the writers of Genesis show their perception of nature: a dark and veiled realm, full of terrifying creatures. This creates an interesting contrast to the modern perception of nature—calm and peaceful. These two opposing perceptions shows how much humans and their ideas have evolved, giving way for a much larger question: what caused these changes? 
