Animal Imagery in Dante’s Inferno
Dante’s Inferno, written by Dante Alighieri, an Italian poet, shares the journey of Dante and Virgil, his guide, through each of the levels of Hell. Throughout the different cantos, each representing a different sin, a common pattern is the use of animal imagery. In this tale, animal imagery is used to compare sinful humans to animals through the descriptions surrounding the she-wolf, predator-prey relations, and birds, in order to emphasize the horrible, inescapable nature of Hell. 
Canto I begins with the imagery of the leopard, lion, and finally a she-wolf, symbolizing inescapable misery. The she-wolf shows this in its description. The she-wolf, “whose leanness seemed to compress / All the world’s cravings, that had made miserable” (Pinsky 5), imagery shows the idea that desire, taking the appearance of cravings, leads to misery. Desire is something that is built into human nature and society but does not typically lead to misery. In fact, desire is often a praised trait showing determination and strength. By showing how misery directly stems from desire, something so common, Dante shows how only in Hell can one simple, ordinary human trait, lead to something much worse. This also furthers the idea of sinful humans becoming animals because misery is a negative human feeling but now it is used to describe an animal which don’t feel misery. Additionally, by opening up Dante’s travels with these three beasts, a painful tone is set for the rest of his journey that lies ahead. Later in Canto I, this theme is displayed again, when Virgil talks about the three beasts’ deaths. These deaths are described as: “a painful death. Not nourished by earthly fare, / he will be fed by wisdom, goodness, and love” (7). This example shows how a painful death is equivalent to being fed what  we usually perceive as pleasant. The comparison of “painful death” to these pleasant characteristics reinforces the idea that in Hell even enjoyable things are harmful. Starting off Canto I with this type of imagery sets the stage for the rest of Dante’s journey by emphasizing how horrid Hell is to even sweet things or people as shown by the two quotes. However, this imagery doesn’t stop at the end of Canto I.
Canto III features more elements of animal imagery, particularly predator and prey relations, further emphasizing how dreadful Hell is as souls are ferried across the river. While waiting to cross, they are described as, “Crowded in a herd, they obey if he [Charon] should summon” (24). The use of the word “herd” is typically used when describing groups of prey animals, not people. This shows how the souls about to be ferried across to the underworld could be considered prey with their treacherous life ahead, while Hell is the predator. Additionally, this imagery goes on to describe the process in which they cross the river. “Swoop from the bank when each is called, / as sure as a trained falcon, to cross to the other side” (24-25). In this example, both the words “swoop” and “falcon” are commonly used to describe birds. In the wild, falcons are predators and free since they can fly wherever but in this case a “trained falcon” appears to be on a leash with a trainer. By using the imagery of a trained falcon, we see a powerful bird controlled by this shows how something with so much power is controlled by someone else as they enter the first ring of Hell, suggesting howing how helpless and trapped these souls are. The greater idea of a controlling someone else could also act as a metaphor for Dante’s experiences in life and in his poems. It is almost as if Dante’s creation of Hell through his writing is the controlling power and trainer while Dante, in his Earth life, is the falcon. This metaphor extends the idea of sinful humans being compared to animals because Dante as a character in the book isn’t sinful but possibly was in real life. This could also be taken a step further to shed light on the views of religion and specifically Christianity in the time period of Dante. The quote about the falcon takes place as souls are waiting to be transported to the first circle of Hell:, Limbo. Limbo is for all the people who did no’t necessarily commit a personal sin through their life but were unbaptized from the start. These people did no’t have a say about if they went to Hell or not. This relates to the idea of the quote because all these souls are ruled by a religion which acts like the trainer and the leash. Regardless of the interpretation, both these examples exhibit the idea of souls being prey to something greater, revealing the harsh, trapping, predatory nature of Hell. 
Finally, in Canto V, the imagery of birds shows the lack of hope in Hell. Shortly after Dante enters the second circle of Hell, he describes the chaotic scene and souls,  “As winter starlings riding on their wings / Form crowded flocks so spirits dip and veer / foundering in the wind’s rough buffetings” (39). This quote uses both  “wings” and “flocks” which are two very bird specific elements, highlighting the animal imagery. In the first line, the idea of birds riding so highly aloft their wings shows hope. The second line features the word crowded, which evokes a more claustrophobic and a less angelic atmosphere. Additionally, “spirits dip” further shows the hope falling to the ground. Finally, the third line makes this even more clear. The word foundering means to sink, showing lost hope. The “wind’s rough buffetings” are analogous to Hell, showing how lost hope happens in Hell.  This all goes back to the fearful nature because birds show the lack of hope which is something that even in tough times, brings people through. In human life, hope is a sense of optimism and a motivating factor but by using the imagery of birds to show lost hope, it shows how immoral humans are more like animals. Finally, without this hope, Hell is even more horrific because there is no chance of ever getting out of this terrible state and nothing to look forward to.
Throughout the different cantos in the book Dante’s Inferno, animal imagery is used to compare animals with sinful humans to show how awful Hell is. In Canto I, the three beasts show how something so common in human society is the root of misery in Hell as shown through the she-wolf. In Canto III, predator-prey imagery shows how souls in Hell are just prey to a greater power, possibly Dante as an author himself. Finally, in Canto V, bird imagery shows how all hope that usually carries humans through tough times is lost in Hell. These uses of animal imagery show the horrid nature of Hell by exhibiting how something as simple and fair as animals, can be utilized to portray evil, sinful humans. 