
Limitations of the Natural World
In Genesis and Ovid’s Metamorphoses, the world is in the process of development, so the two worlds of humanity and nature still have many related qualities. Throughout history, there has been an ongoing theme of man conquering the natural world. This trend is shown by the boundaries and obstacles that are presented to humans throughout both texts. In both Genesis and Metamorphoses the natural world is used as a limitation or boundary which man either has to conquer.
In Genesis, the fruit of the tree of knowledge serves as a limitation for humanity by preventing them from gaining the ability to discern good from evil that eating the fruit will provide them. After God creates the world, he allows humans to eat any of fruit from any trees, “But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die” (Genesis, 2, 17). Here the limitation is not really the actual fruit on the tree but instead God, because he is the one preventing them from eating the fruit. However, he chooses to use this tree, a symbol of nature, ashis limitation instead of not even giving them an opportunity to gain the knowledge. The eating of the fruit could also serve as a test that God gives to Adam and Eve without the intention of killing them at all. God uses this natural symbol to keep the knowledge from them because, besides himself, nature was the only thing in the world. If God had just kept it from them, Adam and Eve could never have been tested. Also, throughout history, there has been a trend of man conquering nature and this is the first time that man chooses knowledge over the natural world. This first natural boundary for humankind is a limit on their knowledge. However, as time passed and different cultures formed, there were also physical boundaries for humanity to overcome.
In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, the natural world contains geographical boundaries that serve as the limit of human civilization by preventing them from further expansion. To the Romans, the world is created in five zones, three of which serve as boundaries for human civilization: “Heat makes the middle zone unlivable, and the two outer zones are deep in snow; between these two extremes, he places two others of temperate climate…” (Martin, 17, 68). At this time, the Roman Empire was surrounded by Scandinavia, Russia, and the Sahara desert, modeling the extreme climates to the north and south of “human civilization.” However, the description Ovid writes exaggerates both the heat and cold because only the far North and South are actually “deep in snow” year round and most of the land across the equator is still livable. Ovid chose to use this exaggeration because his description above is of the early world after the Gods have only recently created it. The exaggeration shows how the natural world was still in a constant state of change, causing the limits set by it to be more exaggerated. Later on, after the Gods are finished creating the geography of the world, nature continues to change but now guided instead by human interaction.
In Metamorphoses, Ovid writes that in the iron age, man conquers over nature but reaches the limit of what nature can provide. After the gold and bronze ages where man and nature coexisted side by side, Ovid writes that “Now men demanded that the rich earth provide more than the crops and sustenance it owes” (Martin, 20, 185-6). The word “demanded” displays that the relationship between the earth and humans is one where the humans are conquering over nature because of its violent connotations. However, the use of the phrase “more than … it owes” while talking about the resources that men harvest from nature signifies that the human civilization has reached the limit of what the earth will give to them. “It owes” also is human-centric because the earth does not actually owe anything to the humans and they have actually reached the limit of what the earth can give not what it owes.
Throughout Genesis and Ovid’s Metamorphoses, natural limitations stand in the way of the human civilization’s progression. All these examples of the natural limits for humanity show a strong theme of man versus nature. This same theme is also present in our modern society nowadays and many other cultures throughout time. The fact that it also shows up in two of the most important myths about the creation of the world signify the relevance of the limitations of the natural world and the importance of them to every society throughout history.
Work Cited
Ovid, Metamorphoses. Translated by Charles Martin, W. W. Norton & Company, 2004.
The Bible. Authorized King James Version, Oxford UP, 1998.
Fernandez-Grinshpun, Lia. Personal interview.  26 October 2018.
