Miles Frank
Alexa Hart
9th Grade English, Period 5
4 October 2018

The Motivation of Gods

Homer writes The Odyssey was written  during a period of time where the gods and mythological characters were thought to influence the lives of humans. Throughout Odysseus’ journey he encounters many such characters from the Greek mythology and each drastically shaped his journey home. While in many Greek stories the they seem unpredictable and whimsical with whom and how they interact, each still has their motivations. In Tthe Odyssey, the motivation of mythological characters spiral into vast consequences for Odysseus and the people around him. 
One of the first stops Odysseus makes on his journey home is at the island of the nymph Calypso. As he is on the island, Calysto immediately falls in love. In book one the gods talk about letting Odysseus back home and Athena says, “[Calypso] holds that poor man (Odysseus), and tries beguiling him with gentle words to cease all thoughts to Ithaca” (107). The small motivation of just an interesting stranger spirals into an intense obsession. This obsession is shown by how incessantly she tries to brainwash Odysseus in an attempt to make him stay with her and how she will not let him or his crew leave the island. The only way they were able to leave was the gods on Mount Olympus, especially Athena and Zeus, persuade her to let him go.
Even though it seems that all the gods were against him, Odysseus had some support from Mount Olympus. At the start of book one Zeus and Athena talk about how Odysseus has suffered and decide that it is time to help him on his journey home. The motivation to to help comes from Zeus saying that Odysseus “is more sensible than other humans, and sacrifices more to the gods,” and Athena saying, “For far too long has he suffered” (107). Athena then goes to talk to Telemachus and, later, in the final book, Athena helps Odysseus take back his house by plotting with him and disguising him. The time Odysseus spent on his journey, him intelligence and sacrifices to the gods, which most people did in Greece at the time, just not as much, was rewarded with the gods ending his ten year suffering and reuniting him with his family. 
Later on in Odysseus’s journey comes upon the island of the Cyclopes and the home of Polyphemus, son of Poseidon. While there Polyphemus trapped Odysseus in his cave and was slowly eating Odysseus’s men. Eventually Odysseus devised a plan of escape and blinded Polyphemus by stabbing him in his one eye. While sailing away from the Cyclops island Odysseus taunts Polyphemus, who responds with, “‘Listen, Earth-Shaker, Blue-Haired Lord Poseidon: Acknowledge me you son, and be my father. Grant that Odysseus, the city-sacker, will never go back home…’ Blue Poseidon granted his son’s prayers” (257). From then on the path home for Odysseus became even more difficult. Even though this might seem like a large motivation because Odysseus blinded Poseidon’s son, it was not as large at it seems. On the same island that Polyphemus lives on there was a whole village of similar Cyclops and like most other gods Poseidon also had children with humans, nymphs and other creatures. Thise means that Polyphemus was only one in many children. This motivation developed into an unrelenting mission to prevent Odysseus from getting home. This alone is probably one of the biggest factors in Odysseus’s delay.
Each mythological character Odysseus faces has their own motivations which each start out as small, at least on the scale of gods, and each motivation spirals into a drastic alteration to Odysseus’s journey. Every stop of his journey he comes to face one of these characters whether they are trying to help like Athena or trying to kill him and his crew like Polyphemus. Each of these encounters show the the typical temperament of the Greek gods and how on their slightest whim they can create gigantic changes in an individual’s life.

Work Cited

Homer. The Odyssey. Translated by Emily Wilson, W. W. Norton & Company, 2018.

