
Poetic Devices Describing Contrapasso in Dante’s Inferno
Throughout Dante’s Inferno, the souls he encounters in each circle of hell have been punished with contrapasso, or poetic justice. These contrapassos relate back to the soul’s sin, each in their own poetic way. Dante consistently shapes his hell around his personal beliefs, mainly exemplified through the choices he makes on who to punish and to what extent they should be punished. Throughout Cantos III through V of Dante’s Inferno, Dante uses metaphor and personification in conjunction with his own personal beliefs to show the extent of the cruelty for the punishment of souls in hell. 
In Canto III, Dante starts to show his personal beliefs by describing how souls in pre-hell are punished. As Dante and Virgil pass through the gates of hell, Dante writes that the sounds of the souls were “all fused in a ceaseless flail / That churns and frenzies that dark and timeless air” (Pinsky, 19, 3.25-6). The use of “churns and frenzies” as a personification for the sound of the Neutrals, displays the cacophony surrounding these souls. However, the specific addition of the word “frenzy”, which means “a state of uncontrolled excitement,” personifies the sounds as also being reckless and uncontrollable. Because these souls were the ones who, in their mortal lives did not take a stance or speak up for anything, their contrapasso is to be subjected to endless shouting to make up for the times where they did not speak up. This contrapasso is even further exemplified by the personification of recklessness that the word “frenzies” provides because the cautious Neutrals are now constantly surrounded by an aura of recklessness. In the Inferno, the main reason why Dante punishes the Neutrals, whose only sin is not taking a stance, so harshly is that Dante was expelled from Florence because he was incredibly outspoken in his political beliefs. This could have been what prompted him to dislike those who he felt were too cowardly to take a position. In this same Canto “[Dante] beheld the shade / Of him who made the Great Refusal, impelled / By cowardice…” (Pinsky, 21, 3.49-51). “The Great Refuser” is thought to be Pope Constantine V, who, as a Pope, should have been allowed into heaven. However, Dante places him in hell because Constantine, out of “cowardice,” stepped down from the Papacy and allowed Dante’s political nemesis Boniface VIII to become the Pope. In Canto III the punishment of souls is increased through his personal beliefs, this is contrasted in Canto IV where Dante’s personal beliefs influence him to create a lighter punishment for souls trapped there.
In Canto IV Dante furthers this allusion to Christianity by expanding it from a singular person to the larger population. As Dante and Virgil pass into Limbo, “[they] encountered / No laments that [they] could hear - except for sighs / That trembled the timeless air; they emanated // From the shadowy sadness…” (Pinsky, 27, 4.19-22). In contrast to Canto III, the air in Limbo is no longer being churned but instead trembled by sighs “from the shadowy sadness”. The use of a low intensity word like “trembles” shows that the punishment for the souls in Limbo is less harsh and extreme than that of the Neutrals. This is because most of the souls in Limbo were those of people who lived before Christianity, and had no way of being Christian or knowing what is sin and what is not. Additionally, Dante also respected these souls more because the poets he admires, and makes allusions to, lived before Christianity. The word “shadowy” to describe the souls’ sadness could likewise be a metaphorical shadow that blocked the souls in Limbo from being able to see the light of Christianity. Here, Dante again uses a metaphor to explain an element of the contrapasso for these souls. Because these people, while they were alive, were “shadowed” from Christianity, they are sent to hell. But because they commited no other sins, their only punishment is that of a “shadowy sadness.” Later on, this dark imagery of shadows in repeated and further exaggerated especially in the next circle of hell. 
Because Dante was a luster, his Christian ideals conflict with his emotions. This conflict is shown through the use of juxtaposition, in Canto V. When Dante enters the second circle he writes, “I am where // All light is mute, with a bellowing like the ocean / Turbulent in a storm of warring winds, / The hurricane of hell in perpetual motion” (Pinsky, 37, 5.27-30). Because mute is such an absolute term, meaning “the inability to speak,” this synesthesia signifies the extremity of this darkness. This muteness is then juxtaposed with “a bellowing like the ocean” and “a storm of warring winds” which both are strong elements of auditory imagery. The use of juxtaposition and synesthesia could both be metaphors for how different the experience in hell is for the lustful souls tormented here. The contrapasso for these souls is twofold; they are both put into an extreme darkness within reach of their real world lover, and yet are separated by “the hurricane of hell in perpetual motion.” This is because, in their mortal life, they were blinded by love and could not escape the desire. Once again, in this circle, Dante’s personal beliefs influence the extent of the punishment and even the placement of the circle itself. It seems strange that in hell the lovers are not completely separated, but instead only buffeted by storming winds. However, Dante is obviously predisposed to not punish lustful souls harshly because the very person he is trying to find, Beatrice, is a woman he lusted over and had an affair with while he was married. Additionally, this circle is only the second deepest of nine which again shows Dante’s positive bias toward the souls here.
Throughout the Cantos III - V of Dante’s Inferno the contrapassos and punishments of souls are shown through Dante’s personal beliefs. After years of a text being a “classic” the context of the piece’s creation and the background of the author can become lost, or thought of as unimportant. However, in the Inferno, it is clear that Dante puts an emphasis on his own thoughts outside of his writing, and lets them influence the story. After being exiled this may have been his best means of communicating these thought with the social sphere he lived in.


Works Cited
Alighieri, Dante. The Inferno of Dante: A New Verse Translation. Translated by Robert Pinsky, New York, Noonday Press, 1996. 
