
In The Canterbury Tales, Chaucer uses the juxtaposition of chivalry in the Knight's tale with the drunken Miller’s tale to show the wide spectrum of sexist beliefs of the time.

The dynamic of the relationship in the Miller’s tale versus the Knight’s tale are juxtaposed to show two sides of the sexist beliefs. Even before describing Alison’s beauty the Miller narrates that John was jealous, “and kept her closely caged,// For she was wild and young, and he was old// And feared he could become a cuckold” (Fisher, The Miller’s Tale, 116-8). Here, the relationship between John and Alison is one of keeping the woman close and guarded. This is juxtaposed with the dynamic in the Knight’s tale, where Emily is pushing away men because “[She wants] to be a maiden all [her] life,// [She] never [wishes] to be a lover or wife” (Fisher, The Knight’s Tale, 1449-50). The fact that, in the end, neither of these come true, Alison is abused by Nicholas, and Emily is forced to marry, shows that no matter what woman have no say in their fate. Additionally the use of the phrase “he could become” in the Miller’s tale puts a clear emphasis on the wants of the man by managing to not even mention what could happen to Alison. A similar effect is also used in the Knight’s tale when Emily says, “I never wish to be a lover or wife.” The use of such an intangible word like “wish,” meaning “want something that cannot or probably will not happen,” shows that Emily has no tangible say in this matter.

Chaucer also juxtaposes the circumstances of the “love triangle” in each story to show how men hold all the power in any relationship. In the Miller’s tale the dynamic is one of Nicholas trying to trick John and get Alison. “A clerk has wasted his time all the while,// If he cannot a carpenter beguile” (Fisher, The Miller’s Tale, 191-2). This quote shows that even though Alison also wants John to be tricked, Nicholas will be the only one beguiling, meaning he would keep all the power. This dynamic of trickery and deceit is juxtaposed in the Knight’s tale, with a dynamic of  Arcite and Palamon chivalrously fighting to get Emily. This dynamic is heightened when Theseus explains the competition and says, “Upon my word, and as I am a knight:// that whichever of you two may… Slay his foe or drive him from the strife,// To him I shall give Emily as a wife” (Fisher, The Knight’s Tale 999-1003). The use of the word “give” shows how Theseus thinks of Emily just as property, a way to settle this feud and get entertainment, and how incredibly small of a voice she has. 

Since Chaucer uses these two juxtapositions of drunkenness and chivalry back to back, it is clear that even men with completely contradictory personalities have the same sexist views and just expressed them in different ways.


Works Cited
Chaucer, Geoffrey. The Selected Canterbury Tales: A New Verse Translation. Translated by Sheila Fisher, New York, W. W. Norton & Company, 2011. 
