Miles Frank
Mar 22, 2019
English 9
Alexa Hart

Pastiche
“I am happy,” said my mother, “to finally have a son; and if your exceptional behaviour continues, I have no doubt of your excellence. Reading, and the study of the letter, is a most rewarding pastime for a upcoming gentleman such as you; and it is in this way I have spent my past years.”
She then took me to her library, and explained to me the works of the various authors cluttered about her shelf; instructing me in their purposes and promising that, had I ever the need, these collections could be mine to pour over, whenever I should so choose. She gave me her list of recommendation, showed me their locations, and there I took my leave.
Since the last week, this pastime of reading, had caught my interest; specifically a title: Red Rising. My fondness of this book had grown recently, and with it my ardor and joy heightened as well; I reminisced while slowly falling asleep after a day of long sittings buried in my text. The passion which I felt flowed through me, sucking me into my couch, constraining me to endless sessions of reading late into the night: midnight, 1am, 2am. My lacking rest caught me; and along with my passion, my sickness grew, sinking me deeper and deeper into the book, the source of my addiction. For the first time in weeks, the sun shone through dark hanging clouds, but the shades of my room took their place in blocking the blinding rays of sun from interrupting me. In these days of darkness, work piled up and my anxiety grew, making me nervous of my eventual return to the real world. 
Slowly terror built in me; the book’s end quickly approached: eighty percent, eighty five, ninety, ninety five. What could come next.
The first way that I modeled my writing after Shelly was the structure of the first paragraph which is similar to the ending of Chapter III. Shelly writes, “I am happy, … to have gained a disciple” (Shelly 50) and I wrote, “I am happy, … to finally have a son.” However, since mine was only going to be one page, I didn’t want to take too long making this part. After this, I didn’t do as close of mirroring, but instead tried to evoke the same emotions. Shelly transitioned Frankenstein's emotions from curious, to passionate, to nervous, and I took this same path. One quote that inspired this piece for me was when Shelly writes, “My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement.” The words “emaciated” and “confinement” reminded me of the time I spent sick just lying on the couch not able to do much but read for hours. Also the emotions that these words and the first phrase evoked for me—rigour and sickness—paralleled with my experience as well. Finally, I made the parallel of sickness and lack of interaction with the outside world throughout in a similar effect she did, to enhance the journey of emotions. 

